Late Review of "A Taste of Scala" in the Scala 3 doc. (#1865)
scala/docs.scala-lang: _overviews/scala3-book/taste-contextual-abstractions.md

TODO: Now that this is a separate section, it needs a little more content.
{% endcomment %}

Under certain circumstances, you can omit some parameters of method calls that are considered repetitive.

> Those parameters are called _Context Parameters_ because there are "guessed" by the compiler from the context surrounding the method call.

Author: yes, thanks

For instance, consider a program that sorts a list of addresses by two criteria: city name and then street name.

```scala
val addresses: List[Address] = ...

> given ordering: Ordering[Address] = Ordering.by(address.city, address.street)

Author: good catch

addresses.sorted(using ordering)

> addresses.sorted

Author: I strongly believe that the previous example was really hard to understand for people that are not familiar with implicit parameters.

```scala
val addresses: List[Address] = ...
addresses.sortBy(address => (address.city, address.street))
```

Here we don't really now what a context is and what the compiler does exactly with it: passing a parameter to a method.

```scala
val addresses: List[Address] = ...
given ordering: Ordering[Address] = Ordering.by(address => address.city, address.street)

addresses.sorted(using ordering)
addresses.sorted
```

In my example I show how to alter the context with the `given` keyword, and how the compiler is able to pass it to a method, in this case `sorted`. It is more concrete and more easier to understand for beginners.

> addresses.sorted

Reviewer: I’m not convinced because you still use `Ordering.by` in the same way we used `sortBy` in the original example (so, the same critics apply to your suggestion).

> addresses.sorted

Author: Okay so your point is that there is a context parameter that is given to the `Ordering.by` method but it is ignored in the explanation?

> addresses.sorted

Reviewer: Yes exactly :smile:

> addresses.sorted

Author: What about this example?

```scala
val persons: List[Person] = ...

given byAge: Ordering[Person] = new Ordering[Person]:
  def compare(x: Person, y: Person) =
    if x.age < y.age then - 1 else if x.age > y.age then 1 else 0
  
persons.sorted(using byAge)
persons.sorted
```

> addresses.sorted

Author: Or even it could be
```scala
val persons: List[Person] = ...

given byAge: Ordering[Person] = new Ordering[Person]:
  def compare(x: Person, y: Person): Int = x.age - y.age
  
persons.sorted(using byAge)
persons.sorted
```

> addresses.sorted

Author: I pushed it

> addresses.sorted

Reviewer: I think this example is clearer, although I find it a little bit weird to sort people by age. We usually define type-class instances to provide a “default” behavior, or I would even say “THE obvious” behavior. In this case, I would find it non-idiomatic to go through a given instance to sort a list of people by age. Instead, I would just use `sortBy(_.age)`.

So, maybe we want to use another type than `Person`?

But, to say it again, I think the change you propose does not really show the value of implicits. People may just think “OK, it saves just passing one parameter, this is not really a big deal…”.

The goal of the original example was to show that the compiler can summon a complex ordering relationship, which would have been a pain to write manually (in this case, an ordering relationship based on two `String` criteria, so it compares the first criterion first, and falls back to the second criterion if the first does not discriminate the two values). IMHO this provides a higher value than what your example shows.

However, I can understand that maybe the way the original example was explained was not good enough and it may have seemed cryptic or maybe it failed to deliver its message?

> addresses.sorted

Author: I agree that the original example shows a pattern that is much more useful and idiomatic than mine.

But there are so much things involved in it and kept hidden that it is really hard to understand. I think beginners would believe that the `sortBy` implementation does some magic (as if it was a macro or something) and they would miss the point and beauty of context parameters...

If we keep the original example I believe that we should show where the context is defined and how the parameter is summoned by the compiler and passed to the `sortBy` method.

> addresses.sorted

Author: What about that, along with some explanations?

```scala
val addresses: List[Address] = ...

addresses.sortBy(address => (address.city, address.street))(Ordering.Tuple2(Ordering.String, Ordering.String))
addresses.sortBy(address => (address.city, address.street))
```

> addresses.sorted

Author: Should I add a `import Ordering.given` to show where the context is defined?

> addresses.sorted

Author: ```
val addresses: List[Address] = ...

given ordering: Ordering[(String, String)] = Ordering.Tuple2(Ordering.String, Ordering.String)

addresses.sortBy(address => (address.city, address.street))(using ordering)
addresses.sortBy(address => (address.city, address.street))
```

```

The ordering logic is defined by the `ordering` instance wich is made available in the current scope by the `given` keyword.

> The last two lines, that sort the list of addresses, are strictly similar.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The last two lines, that sort the list of addresses, are equivalent.
```
?

Author: I pushed `strictly equivalent`.
I want to keep the `strictly` to stress the fact that there is nothing that differs in the produced byte-code.

TODO: Now that this is a separate section, it needs a little more content.
{% endcomment %}

Under certain circumstances, you can omit some parameters of method calls that are considered repetitive.

> Those parameters are called _Context Parameters_ because there are inferred by the compiler from the context surrounding the method call.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Those parameters are called _Context Parameters_ because they are inferred by the compiler from the context surrounding the method call.
```

For instance, consider a program that sorts a list of addresses by two criteria: the city name and then street name.

```scala
val addresses: List[Address] = ...

addresses.sortBy(address => (address.city, address.street))(using Ordering.Tuple2(Ordering.String, Ordering.String))

> addresses.sortBy(address => (address.city, address.street))

Reviewer: What do you think of showing first the normal Scala version (with no explicit `Ordering` parameter), and then explain that the compiler infers the `Ordering` parameter to `Ordering.Tuple2(Ordering.String, Ordering.String)`?

Author: I totally agree!

```

> The `sortBy` method takes a first parameter which describes the sorting criteria and a second parameter of type `Ordering` that defines how to compare two values of that criteria.
> 
> In our case we need an instance of `Ordering[(String, String)]`.
> But this instance is so much common that it is avalaible in the default context.
> We can pass it manually as in the first call or we can simply omit it as in the second call. 
> There is no difference at all because in the second case the compiler infers the exact same parameter.
> 
> _Contextual Abstractions_ is a very powerfull technique that can help you build code that is modular, extensible and concise.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The `sortBy` method takes as a parameter a function that returns, for every element, the value to use to compare it with the other elements. In this case, we pass a function that returns a pair containing the city name and the street name.

Note that we only indicate _what_ to compare, but not _how_ to compare. How does the sorting algorithm know how to compare pairs of `String` values? Actually, the method `sortBy` takes a second parameter (a context parameter) that defines how to compare the elements, and which is automatically inferred by the compiler in the above call.

Here is the same call to `sortBy` as above, but this time we reveal the second argument, which was previously inferred by the compiler, and which defines how to compare pairs of `String` values:

~~~ scala
addresses.sortBy(address => (address.city, address.street))(using Ordering.Tuple2(Ordering.String, Ordering.String))
~~~

The compiler is able to supply the second argument based on the _type_ of the values to compare (here, a pair `(String, String)`). More generally, with context parameters, the compiler fills some values of your program based on their type. This technique allows developers to write less repetitive code.

_Contextual Abstractions_ is a powerful technique that helps developers to write code that is modular, extensible, and concise.
```

Author: That's better, thank you!

TODO: Now that this is a separate section, it needs a little more content.
{% endcomment %}

> Under certain circumstances, you can omit some parameters of method calls because that are considered repetitive.

Reviewer: One more:

```suggestion
Under certain circumstances, you can omit some parameters of method calls that are considered repetitive.
```

> Those parameters are called _Context Parameters_ because there are inferred by the compiler from the context surrounding the method call.

Reviewer: The previous conversion was marked as resolved but I think you forgot to apply the suggestion :)

```suggestion
Those parameters are called _Context Parameters_ because they are inferred by the compiler from the context surrounding the method call.
```

For instance, consider a program that sorts a list of addresses by two criteria: the city name and then street name.

```scala
val addresses: List[Address] = ...

addresses.sortBy(address => (address.city, address.street))
```

> The `sortBy` method takes a function that computes, for every element, the value that is used to compare it with the other elements.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The `sortBy` method takes a function that returns, for every address, the value to use to compare it with the other addresses.
```

In this case, we pass a function that returns a pair containing the city name and the street name.

> Note that we only indicate _what_ to compare, but not _how_ to compare them.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Note that we only indicate _what_ to compare, but not _how_ to perform the comparisons.
```

How does the sorting algorithm know how to compare pairs of `String`?

Actually, the `sortBy` method takes a second parameter---a context parameter---that is inferred by the compiler.
It does not appear in the above example because it is supplied by the compiler.

This second parameter implements the _how_ to compare.
It is convenient to omit it because we know `String`s are generally compared using the lexicographic order.

However, it is also possible to pass it explicitly:

```scala
addresses.sortBy(address => (address.city, address.street))(using Ordering.Tuple2(Ordering.String, Ordering.String))
```

In this case, the `Ordering.Tuple2(Ordering.String, Ordering.String)` instance is exactly the one that is otherwise inferred by the compiler.
In other words both examples produce the same program.

> _Contextual Abstractions_ is used to avoid repetition of code.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
_Contextual Abstractions_ are used to avoid repetition of code.
```

> It helps developers write pieces of code that are extensible and concise at the same time.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
They help developers write pieces of code that are extensible and concise at the same time.
```
